BEN GALBRAITH: I
think you're taking
sort of intense literal
logic and applying it
to a colloquial situation
that has everything
to do with tradition and nothing
to do with literal truth,
right?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
SURMA: Who are you and why?
DION ALMAER: Nice.
Do you want to go first?
BEN GALBRAITH: I'd
rather you did.
DION ALMAER: Oh, thank you.
My name is Dion Almaer.
The "why" is an interesting one.
So I've worked with this
guy for a long time, lots
of different companies.
Way back in the day, we did
this thing called Ajaxian.
There's this thing called Ajax.
You are too young to know it.
JAKE: I remember Ajax.
[LAUGHTER]
I am not young enough.
DION ALMAER: And
that was really fun
to kind of see the
web kind of come back
and go from docs to
apps and the like.
So I've been living in
the web for a long time.
Used to be at Google.
I'm now back at
Google, running DevRel
for a few different
teams across the web--
Android Assistant
and other things.
What about you?
BEN GALBRAITH: Yeah.
So I'm Ben Galbraith.
I am on the Chrome team.
I lead product for the folks
who are working on the web
platforms, so the
folks who are thinking
about how the web works on
your web page and things.
JAKE: We've been doing these
interview things all day.
SURMA: We've never
done interviews before.
JAKE: Yeah, and we
missed your talk.
BEN GALBRAITH: So
we open the talk
just by showing that
PWAs are everywhere.
And PWAs-- it's fair to
ask what the heck that is.
Basically, the web has
been evolving dramatically
over the past few years.
And it's been getting a
ton of new capabilities.
And it's a whole
new platform than it
used to be just four
or five years ago.
And so we shared a lot
of data around this.
And there's two categories.
One is what's actually
changed about the web.
And the other is
what happens when
people take advantage of
the new capabilities that
are on the web.
And we shared a bunch
of case studies.
Getting to the capability
side, the big one
is this thing called
Service Worker, which--
JAKE: I've heard of it.
BEN GALBRAITH: Have you?
JAKE: Go on.
[LAUGHTER]
Let me explain it to you
in very simple terms--
JAKE: Oh, OK.
BEN GALBRAITH: So that
you can understand.
But it's like
forever, everyone's
understood the web is pages,
pages that the browser requests
and renders.
And Service Worker is the
first major new primitive
on the web that
changes the game.
Because with Service
Worker, you now
have this code that's
resident in the browser.
It can receive events from the
site, even when the user has
left the page.
You can use it to
override the network.
I love how you guys are
critiquing my explanation
in real time.
JAKE: It's actually
really good so far.
[LAUGHTER]
BEN GALBRAITH: But
yeah, it lets you
as a developer take control
of the networking stack,
which seems like a--
why would you want to do that?
But it's super
important, because there
are a lot of people
using the web who
have intermittent connectivity
where it just drops out
or it's really slow.
And so as a developer,
you're in the driver's seat.
It doesn't show
you the dyno screen
if there a there's a problem.
You can create these
really smooth experiences.
DION ALMAER: I feel
like this time, too,
we actually talked about
the Google properties
they're actually using this for.
BEN GALBRAITH: Oh, that's right.
That's right.
Let me wrap up Service
Worker real quick.
Because the big news is
that it's finally in Safari.
And it hasn't been
for a long time.
And it's finally in Edge.
But yeah, you were talking
about some other stuff too.
DION ALMAER: Like Google
Search actually using
the Service Worker--
got to talk about that today--
50% less JavaScript.
BEN GALBRAITH:
Yeah, that's right.
DION ALMAER: All the
intermittent things.
You can do a search,
you're offline.
When you come back
online, do the search.
Pop back-- hey, you
want the results?
BEN GALBRAITH: So we shared
a bunch of these examples.
And then we had, I think,
some pretty exciting new stuff
to share.
I think stuff that's
new for a lot of people.
The problem with the web is
that it's out in the open.
So for insiders--
SURMA: What a problem.
BEN GALBRAITH: There's really
not a lot of new things to say,
and if there is, that's
a problem, right?
Because we don't control
the web at Google.
So we're not going to
have this brand new thing.
But we are highlighting a lot
of the recent developments,
one of which is this
thing called desktop PWAs.
SURMA: Yes.
JAKE: Oh.
BEN GALBRAITH: This is cool.
We showed how Spotify
is using desktop PWA.
So you go to their site,
and you can install it
to your launcher, in
this case in Chrome OS,
and it gets its own
top level window.
So alt tab now
works with websites.
JAKE: Oh, so good.
BEN GALBRAITH: It's
fantastic, right?
JAKE: And I'm glad we
did that on mobile first.
But it there was a
missing piece that we
couldn't do it on desktop.
BEN GALBRAITH: Productivity
on the web is a big deal.
We talk about mobile,
mobile, mobile-- and mobile's
super important.
But there's billions of
people on the desktop.
But the other thing
is using a lot
of these popular
productivity apps
as top level windows
on Chrome OS.
Because that's where it is now.
We're bringing it
to Windows and Mac.
But it's not there yet.
SURMA: I felt like
that lots of companies
doing their apps in an Electron
shows that there was a desire
to do that.
To write web and
just have it as if it
wasn't all on the computer.
BEN GALBRAITH: Let me
talk to you about AutoCAD.
Because AutoCAD-- they
created a web version
of their application, which
is like kind of mind-blowing.
You go to a lot of
analyst speeches,
and the intelligent analysts
are up there going like,
well, a lot of stuff's
come into the web,
but old applications
like AutoCAD
will never come
to the web, or it
will take them a really long--
It's here.
They actually
shipped it in March.
That's right.
And I said, oh,
AutoCAD's been innovating
a ton since it's shipped.
So it's actually
pretty cutting edge.
But they brought their
C++ codebase to the web.
JAKE: So it's just
something great, right?
So kind of like job done.
We can relax for
the next few years.
DION ALMAER: Can I
take the negative side?
JAKE: Oh.
SURMA: Oh.
BEN GALBRAITH: OK, I
think we're done here now.
JAKE: Wrap it up.
DION ALMAER: I think
the interesting thing
about the state of
the web, like they're
talking about, like
everything that's going on,
all the good things.
But that's not the entire
web that you actually
experience every day.
And we want to keep
adding capabilities,
and we want to keep bringing
Electron back to the web,
and Cordova back to the
web, and all these things.
How do we get--
SURMA: The long tail.
DION ALMAER: --all of
the long tail in there.
And that's why we
do a lot of work
with the Wordpresses and
all these different CMSs.
How can we effect
that long tail?
SURMA: Yeah, what does the
new capabilities matter
if nobody uses them, right?
DION ALMAER: And
I feel like we're
kind of unlocking
both at the moment.
BEN GALBRAITH: That's
where AMP comes in, too.
Because a lot of the keynote
was talking about AMP
because the web platform
has a ton of capabilities.
But it's also become
a little complex.
I mean, I don't know
if you've noticed.
SURMA: You don't say.
BEN GALBRAITH: It can be hard
to figure out how to do it.
And so AMP is all
about how can we
make the web really easy for
a set of really targeted use
cases with an
opinionated approach?
And it's been maybe a
little controversial.
And this year, we did
a couple of things
that I'm excited about.
One is that we announced
that we're fixing
the problem with AMP URLs.
And if you don't know
what that issue is--
JAKE: I can guess.
BEN GALBRAITH: It's
this double-edged sword,
where AMP does this
cool thing, where
it hosts content on this server
that optimizes it and shrinks
images and all this stuff.
But it's hosted on that server.
SURMA: I always understood
why they were doing it.
But still the artifact
of the URL was just--
BEN GALBRAITH: So annoying.
And it's annoying to everybody.
Some people look at
the URL, and they
think we're trying to move the
whole internet onto our origin,
onto our domain, which is
not at all what we want.
So there's this new
emerging standard
called web packaging,
which on itself could be
the subject of a conversation.
I'm super excited about it.
But from a high
level, what it does--
it lets you, as a
developer, take your site
and effectively wrap it in a
secure envelope and just say--
SURMA: You might say a package.
BEN GALBRAITH: A package--
maybe a better metaphor.
And it doesn't matter
where it comes from.
It's advertised as though
it came from your origin.
And so you can imagine--
SURMA: Right.
It's the magic of certificates.
BEN GALBRAITH: --a
browser of the future
that's more like peer-to-peer.
So if you're in this area where
you can't actually get to,
let's say, "The New York
Times," if any peer has
a version of "The New York
Times," that's fairly recent,
you can get it
from them, creating
this really
decentralized networking
thing which is at the heart
of the original spirit
of the internet.
Anyway, so AMP's able
to use web packaging.
And it's an emerging
standard, we'll see.
The other thing that
I'm excited about
is that we've announced that
AMP is embracing web standards
and things like the Chrome
User Experience Report
so that we'll be able to use the
actual performance of web pages
to decide whether
or not they're fast.
JAKE: So that's what gives
it the little icon, right?
BEN GALBRAITH: Today you see
that icon if something's AMP.
And moving forward,
we've shared our intent
to use things like the
Chrome User Experience Report
and other things as
the canonical indicator
for whether or not something is
going to perform really well.
DION ALMAER: We always saw
that performance with AMP,
but there's the privacy
preservation piece that it has,
too.
BEN GALBRAITH:
Yeah, that's right.
DION ALMAER: If I go in,
I'm in an aggregator.
If I prefetch or start pinging
over to this other server, then
all of a sudden Dion the
user can be on the search
and JakeArchibald.com
knows something
and has set a cookie on me.
And that's kind of weird.
JAKE: Without you ever
clicking on that link.
DION ALMAER: Without
me ever knowing.
Yeah, exactly.
So by having it somewhere
else on Google servers,
or whatever AMP cache
it's on, we can hide that.
And now with Web Packaging,
it's baked into the platform.
So that's really
exciting, I think.
JAKE: So what do you
think the web needs
to do within the next
10 years to survive?
DION ALMAER: I mean,
there's the foundations,
and there's the real
future future self, right?
Foundationally, we just need
to fix the performance problem
on the web, just focus in on
getting people using the web.
BEN GALBRAITH: I mean, the web
is this fantastic treasure.
I feel like if you look at it,
what do we have in the web?
We have this open ecosystem
where the standards can
be implemented on any platform.
Think about that for a second.
Because most other platforms
use their ecosystem
as a walled garden
to block other people
and to chain people
in that ecosystem.
The web is totally open.
We've got this
inherent index ability
so you can go through
and discover it.
You don't have a single
gatekeeper or toll collector.
These are just fantastic
attributes of the web.
SURMA: One of my first talk as a
Googler is I was using a slide,
but I opened a website
on a Nintendo DS.
I was like, that's really a
unique feature of a platform
that can write a website, and
suddenly it is in your car
or on your phone
on a Nintendo DS.
BEN GALBRAITH:
But I think, Jake,
the web is worth
having in society.
JAKE: I agree.
SURMA: That's an understatement.
BEN GALBRAITH: But
I think when you're
talking about 10 years,
what I'm really focused on
is how can we make sure that the
web remains the platform where
developers can bring
their best experiences?
Because I think there's a
lot of competing platforms.
Some of them can do a
better job at animations
and visual effects on the web--
maybe.
I don't know if that's
a fair statement.
DION ALMAER: But not
10 years from now.
[LAUGHTER]
JAKE: Two years from now.
SURMA: One year from now?
BEN GALBRAITH: So we've got
to make sure developers have
the capabilities they need.
We've got to make sure that
users actually prefer the web.
And we've got to make
sure that browsers
are where computing is moving.
And when you think about that
frame, we have a lot of work
to do.
I feel like developers--
we've got to do a lot.
Houdini is one of my
favorite projects.
JAKE: The second
Service Workers.
[LAUGHTER]
BEN GALBRAITH: There's a lot of
additional stuff we need to do.
So when you talk
about 10 years, I
want to see the
web platform evolve
to have more capabilities.
I don't want to see us
chasing that platform.
So I don't want to see
us advertising the web
as it's almost as
good as this platform.
You should develop websites
that are like apps.
That maybe is a
controversial statement.
You were going to
say the web has
its own unique flavors, right?
SURMA: It has its own unique
capabilities and use cases,
where--
BEN GALBRAITH: That's right.
SURMA: Like, there is
still use where I say,
no, that's a use case
for a native platform.
That's not something you
want to solve on the web.
BEN GALBRAITH: I
couldn't agree more.
I think if what you as a
developer want to build
is something that
feels like it's
an extension of some
specific operating system,
it's a native app.
And you'd be kind of crazy
to use the web for that.
But if you want to engage
with the most users
you can, if you want
to do it in a way that
gives the user the best
experience in terms
of getting something done and
being able to have sessions
that span devices and things
like that, that's the web.
That's what the web
should be good for.
JAKE: Someone came up to me and
asked me for a selfie before.
I was over the moon.
But then he said, thank
you very much for Facebook.
He thought I was
Mark Zuckerberg.
DION ALMAER: I think
it is the blue.
BEN GALBRAITH: It's the blue.
JAKE: It says, JS.
What?
SURMA: It's probably
also the face.